Dear Prof. Coulson

I would like to submit a manuscript for the Ideas and Perspectives section of Ecology Letters. Our manuscript is entitled “Bringing Elton and Grinnell together: a quantitative framework to represent the biogeography of ecological interaction networks” and the authors are Dominique Gravel, Benjamin Baiser, Jennifer A. Dunne, Jens-Peter Kopelke, Neo D. Martinez, Tommi Nyman, Timothée Poisot, Spencer A. Wood, Daniel B. Stouffer, Jason M. Tylianakis and Tomas Roslin. We submitted a proposal on May 16th, which was reviewed by Prof. Hillebrand and accepted. 

Biogeography has traditionally focused on the spatial distribution and abundance of species. Both are driven by the way species interact with one another, but also by the way these interactions vary across time and space. Here, we call for an integrated approach, adopting the view that community structure is best represented as a network of ecological interactions, and show how it translates to biogeography questions. We outline a novel conceptual framework, suggesting that the ecological niche should encompass the effect of the environment on species distribution (the Grinnellian dimension of the niche) and on the ecological interactions among them (the Eltonian dimension). Starting from this novel concept, we develop a quantitative theory to explain turnover of interactions in space and time – i.e. a novel approach to interaction distribution modeling. The problem could be formalized sequentially by understanding first why only a fraction of the species co- occur locally and second why these species do or do not interact. We apply this framework to host–parasite interactions across Europe and find that two aspects of the environment (temperature and precipitation) exert a strong imprint on species co-occurrence, but not on species interactions. Even where species co-occur, interaction proves to be stochastic rather than deterministic, adding to variation in realized network structure. We also find that a large majority of host-parasite pairs are never found together, thus precluding any inferences regarding their probability to interact. This first attempt to explain variation of network structure at large spatial scales opens new perspectives at the interface of species distribution modeling and community ecology.

This contribution during two working groups featuring top names in current ecological network research (Gravel; Baiser; Dunne; Martinez Nyman; Poisot; Roslin; Stouffer; Wood; and Tylianakis; all with recent entries in Ecology Letters) and draw on one of the largest data set of spatially-referenced networks collected to date (Kopelke).

This contribution is independent of previous work published by the authors of the present submission and thus represents an original submission. We attached recent manuscripts by Poisot et al. (2015), Bartomeus et al. (2016) and Morales-Castilla et al. (2015) that are cited in the manuscript. These publications set the idea that ecological interactions and interaction networks should be viewed as stochastic processes, but do not consider the analytical framework we present in this study.   

We attached to the submission the code we used to perform the analysis, along with an updated version of the R scripts. This material is for review only. Provided the manuscript is accepted for publication, we would upload the code on a public github repository and the data would be publicly available from the database mangal. 

Thank you for considering this proposal. We look forward to reading from you.

Sincerly,